---
layout: post
title: Tomes
---

A lot of my research is focused on topology and shape optimization - both numerically and experimentally.
Sometimes I try to spin this as a strength but often it can be rather overwhelming trying to become an expert in two domains or even three when trying to develop some explain some theoretical underpinnings.

At my lab we focus on exploiting nonlinearities. This is another double edge sword I deal with. While on the one hand, nonlinearities give rise to a richer output space, this benefit also means that they are more sensitive to the initial condition or control. For example, if we have some control and the output behaved linearly with respect to that control then small changes in input would also lead to small changes in the output ( relatively speaking that is ). 

This is rarely the case in the types of materials and structure I am trying to understand and design. In one of my first publications, I showed how a structure can change it's bifurcation structure through impersceptible changes in the geometry. I.e. you can have one characteristic loading response for one structure and then have a wildly different response for what you may think is the same structure. 

When manufacturing these structures, I relied on casting techniques using high resolution 3D printed molds. I would look at the structure, occassionally measuring features by taking pictures next to a ruler, sometimes use calipers and ultimately decide that the resulting shape was good enough. For that project this route worked. However, now that I am optimizing I need to be more sensitive to quantifying the overall resulting shape of my manufacturing process. This is what I am designing. 


That is quite a lot of introduction to this post. The rest of post will deal with that problem. I want to discuss the the challenges that come with quantifying shapes or rather deviation in shape in soft elastic parts. And will describe tools that can be helpful. Oh and the reason for the title of this blurb comes from Tomes. It comes from temnein in latin - meaning 'to cut'.


