---
layout: post
title: Tomes
---

A lot of my research is focused on topology and shape optimization - both numerically and experimentally.
Sometimes I try to spin this as a strength but often it can be rather overwhelming trying to become an expert in two domains or even three when trying to develop some explain some theoretical underpinnings.

At my lab we focus on exploiting nonlinearities. This is another double edge sword I deal with. While on the one hand, nonlinearities give rise to a richer output space, this benefit also means that they are more sensitive to the initial condition or control. For example, if we have some control and the output behaved linearly with respect to that control then small changes in input would also lead to small changes in the output ( relatively speaking that is ). 

This is rarely the case in the types of materials and structure I am trying to understand and design. In one of my first publications, I showed how a structure can change it's bifurcation structure through impersceptible changes in the geometry. I.e. you can have one characteristic loading response for one structure and then have a wildly different response for what you may think is the same structure. 

When manufacturing these structures, I relied on casting techniques using high resolution 3D printed molds. I would look at the structure, occassionally measuring features by taking pictures next to a ruler, sometimes use calipers and ultimately decide that the resulting shape was good enough. For that project this route worked. However, now that I am optimizing I need to be more sensitive to quantifying the overall resulting shape of my manufacturing process. This is what I am designing. 


That is quite a lot of introduction to this post. The rest of post will deal with that problem. I want to discuss the the challenges that come with quantifying shapes or rather deviation in shape in soft elastic parts. And will describe tools that can be helpful. Oh and the reason for the title of this blurb comes from Tomes. It comes from temnein in latin - meaning 'to cut'.

We had a new formlabs printer arrive that seems to be working consistently. The old one had some quality issues but we finally have a working one. This will be neat as it has the capability of printing soft elastic parts with SLI resolution printing. That means that I can directly print the structures I am optimizing if all goes well. I will definitely have to quantify deviations in shape though. 

The main issue with the structures and materials that I am making is that they need to be small enough to fit in our testing set-up. They are comprised of repeating units of which there is a minimum number that I need to include in order to avoid or at least average out boundary effects. This results in features that can be quite small. We can consistently cast features that are 1mm in resolution. Have you ever tried using calipers for soft structures at this resolution??? In theory my
calipers say they can measure up at the scale of 100 micrometers but the dang part feature that I am measuring is really soft. When I am measuring am I squeezing the part? How far off am I? Also how can I measure the through thickness resolution of this part? What if I am designing a fully 3D structure and not some extruded geometry? 

Don't worry. It is not the end of the world. We just have to be a bit more clever. For surface features, we can simply take a digital image with a high resolution camera next to so some objects whose size is already known. This can be automated for a certain set of structures. Load up opencv run a feature detection or simply go the point and click route and tada you have the scale of the thing you wanted to measure. 

Not sastified with this? What about the quantification of the structure through the thickness? Oh no I printed this part on the new formlabs and look it clearly is far away from what I wanted it to be. How bad is it actually?

In order to answer this question, we have to turn to cutting. Yes Tomes! Specifically, microtomes and macrotomes. These are precise cutting machines used in industry. Think scientific cold cut style slicers. 
This is what the life sciences has been using for decades! Want to image the inside of a skull. Macrotomes. What do sections of your blood cells look like. Microtomes. 

In the life sciences they have the same problem I have in the lab. They work with really soft materials. To overcome this they need to cast their object in something rigid. However, this only fixes the boundary. To rigidify the entire object for cutting you need something much cooler. You need to freeze it. Cryogenic microtomes. I would have to experiment with freezing the silicone rubbers and the formlabs elastic material I but this could be an interesting procedure. You know what is also
interesting. I now have a bunch of cross sections of my 3D structure that I want to create a solid object from. How can I reconstruct the geometry. The numerical analyst/computational scientist in me says "oooh! fun problem to work on", but the pragmatic researcher says someone probably has already done, and it may already come with whatever imaging tool you will use. I guess I will try to get trained at CNS to see what is possible. 

But wait! There is more. After looking at the cost of using the equipment at CNS, I saw that they have a microCT machine and it is made by Nikon! And guess who makes our TOMES? Leica! This makes total sense! 

I may go with the microCT route! This seems like it would be a better workflow. Let's see if I can get trained on these machines. If not I will hand my samples over to someone who is. 


